# Exercises: Build an ERC721 Token Contract - Gift Lottery

Now that you have finished **CryptoZombies**, you should have got the
idea of the ERC721 Non-fungible token.

As holidays come, people at work exchange gifts. Therefore, the head of
the team has decided to implement the ERC721 for gifts called
**GiftsLottery**, in which people of the staff will send gifts to the
contract and after a given time he will \"randomly\" distribute the
gifts.

Open Zeppelin
-------------

Have you ever heard about Open Zeppelin? This is a library for writing
secure Smart Contracts on Ethereum. They are providing secure, tested
and community-audited code for the most popular standards and used
contracts on the Ethereum network. For the purpose of the exercise, go
to
[https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-solidity](https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-solidity%20)
and download the ERC721 token (in **contracts token ERC721**. In
addition, you will need **SafeMath** and **Ownable** due to
dependencies, which are stored in **math** and **ownership** folders
respectively. Go through the code, especially in **ERC721Token**,
because you will use it.

CryptoLottery
-------------

Create a new contract called **GiftLottery**, which will inherit
**ERC721Token**. Do not forget to import the contract:

![](/assets/exercises-erc721-lotterygift-01.png)

The contract will have an owner, who will distribute the gifts after
certain time has passed and will have a list of all the participants:

![](/assets/exercises-erc721-lotterygift-03.png)

Each gift will have a title, description and a URL of an image (IPFS
hash). Each token will store information of itself by a given token id:

![](/assets/exercises-erc721-lotterygift-04.png)

Upon initialization, the contract will take a due date of the lottery
submission and will call the inherited contract\'s constructor to name
the contract:

![](/assets/exercises-erc721-lotterygift-06.png)

Create an event called CreateGift, which will take a participant and an
id of the gift:

![](/assets/exercises-erc721-lotterygift-07.png)

Create a method called **createGift**, which will take the gift
information as parameters and mint a new gift to the owner of the
contract:

![](/assets/exercises-erc721-lotterygift-08.png)

Create a method called **pseudoRandom**, which will take the role of a
random generator, which by a gift id load the gift and calculate
**keccak256** on its title, description, URL and gift id. **Keep in mind
that someone might be left with no gift and someone might receive two or
more!** The method will \"randomly\" generate the id of the participant
to which the gift will be sent:

![](/assets/exercises-erc721-lotterygift-09.png)

Create an event called **ReceivedGift**, which will take a winner
address and the id of the gift:

![](/assets/exercises-erc721-lotterygift-010.png)

Create a method called **distributeGifts**, which after the due date of
participation will distribute the gifts:

![](/assets/exercises-erc721-lotterygift-02.png)

**Test** the contract. Think of a way to avoid participant missing a
gift.

What to Submit?
===============

Create a **zip file** (e.g. **username-solidity-erc721.zip**) holding
the **.sol** files from problems above.

Submit your zip file as **homework** at the course Web site.