# Exercises: First Steps in Solidity Smart Contract Programming

This document describes the **exercise assignments** for the
[[\"Blockchain Academy\" course @ Software
University]{.underline}](https://softuni.bg/opencourses/blockchain-dev-course).
In this lesson we learned the **basics of Solidity** programming
language. The goal of this exercise is to get practical skills in
writing simple smart contracts in Solidity, publishing and testing
contracts in the Remix IDE.

Use the [Remix IDE](https://remix.ethereum.org) to write the code,
publish the contract in a testing environment and test it to ensure it
works as expected.

Open the **Remix IDE** (<https://remix.ethereum.org>) and create a new
empty Solidity source code file (the icon for this is in the upper-left
corner):

![](/assets/exercises-first-steps-in-solidity-01.png)

A new window should open. In it you must write a **name** for your file
(e.g. "Incrementor Contract"). After you have chosen a name click
**\[OK\].**

![](/assets/exercises-first-steps-in-solidity-012.png)

Your browser should look very similar to the following screenshot:

![](/assets/exercises-first-steps-in-solidity-015.png)

Make sure that **"Auto compile"** is checked so as to make testing
seamless. Now we are set!

Simple Storage Contract
-----------------------

Write a simple contract in Solidity that keeps in the blockchain an
**integer variable** and provides public functions to **read** it and to
**change** it.

### Hints

Open the **Remix IDE** (<https://remix.ethereum.org>) and create a new
empty Solidity source code file:

![](/assets/exercises-first-steps-in-solidity-016.png)

First, we select which version of the complier we will be using:

![](/assets/exercises-first-steps-in-solidity-017.png)

Write the source code of the contract, step by step. Write the
**contract definition**:

![](/assets/exercises-first-steps-in-solidity-018.png)

Next, in the contract body define the **integer data storage field**
named **storedData**. Use an integer type of your choice, e.g. **uint**
(256-bit unsigned integer). Your data field is just like a member field
in a class, but it is **b** on the blockchain. While this contract stays
alive on the blockchain, this field value also will stay with it. You
may choose **public** or **private** visibility. Public fields can be
read by anyone, while private fields can be read by the contract code
only. Your code might look like this:

![](/assets/exercises-first-steps-in-solidity-020.png)

The function takes a value **x** as input and stores it in the data
field **storedData**. The function visibility is declared **public**,
which means that the function can be called by anyone. In Solidity you
don't write **this.storedData** like in other object-oriented languages.

Next, write a function to **read the current value** from the data
storage field on the blockchain:

![](/assets/exercises-first-steps-in-solidity-021.png)

This function takes no parameters and returns a result of type **uint**.
Its visibility is declared **public**. The function is also declared
**constant**, which means that it does not change the contract's
internal state. If you don't declare the function as constant, the
compiler will issue a warning.

Now your code is almost ready, but the Solidity compiler still issues a
**warning**:

![](/assets/exercises-first-steps-in-solidity-02.png)

To fix this, you may **add a compiler version** definition at the start
of the contract:

![](/assets/exercises-first-steps-in-solidity-03.png)

The above pragma definition says that this contract should be compiled
by Solidity **compiler version 0.4.\*** (later than 0.4.18 and earlier
than 0.5).

Now you are ready to **compile your code**. The Remix IDE has built-in
compiler, which is by default in "auto-compile" mode. Activate the
**\[Compile\] tab** and see the compilation results:

![](/assets/exercises-first-steps-in-solidity-04.png)

The next step is to **publish the contract** on the local in-browser
blockchain environment. Open the **\[Run\] tab** in the Remix IDE. Click
on the **\[Create\] button**. It will deploy the contract in the local
JavaScript in-browser blockchain testing Ethereum network. As a result
of the publish operation, the contract will be created, and its address
will be returned from the blockchain network.

![](/assets/exercises-first-steps-in-solidity-05.png)

The **\[Details\] button** in the execution logs provides additional
technical information about the transaction that caused the contract to
become published:

![](/assets/exercises-first-steps-in-solidity-06.png)

Now the contract is published. The next step is to **test its
behavior**. In Remix you can invoke published contract's public members
(call methods / read public fields) form the UI at the right-down side
of the screen.

Try to change the contract data through the **\[set\] button**. It will
invoke contract's **set(x)** operation. Also test the **get()**
operation the same way. Assign some value in the contract, then read the
value back.

![](/assets/exercises-first-steps-in-solidity-07.png)

Voila! You successfully developed, published and tested your first smart
contract.

Incrementor Contract
--------------------

Write a Solidity contract, as described below:

-   The contract holds a certain value

    -   **value (uint)** -\> not accessible outside the contract

-   Anyone can see the function and read the value

    -   Returns **uint**

    -   **Not modifying the state of blockchain!**

-   Anyone can increment the value

    -   increment(uint delta)

    -   **No output!**

-   Test and play around with the contract

**\
**

**Now, let's test it! **

So, by following the steps that were outlined a few pages back we create
our contract. Now you must see **two** buttons in the bottom-right
corner of your screens, very similar to the following screenshot:

![](/assets/exercises-first-steps-in-solidity-08.png)

Next to the **\[increment\] button** you should be seeing a field with a
placeholder that describes the type of value that is expected (**uint**)
and by what name the code will be using it (delta) -- all this
information is part of the function **increment**.

Previously we have seen what happens if we click on the **\[get\]
button** -- the function returns zero. Now let's test the increment
function by passing it the value **7,** clicking the **\[increment\]
button** and then clicking the **\[get\] button**:

![](/assets/exercises-first-steps-in-solidity-09.png)

From the left-hand side of this screenshot it is visible that first the
**increment** function is called and afterwards the **get** function.
Basically, you should have gotten the value that you have passed to the
**increment** function. Let pass to this function another positive
integer value (remember, because the type of the expected variable is
uint a negative number will throw and error. In addition, if you pass to
the function a **positive** floating-point number it will be truncated
and only the integer part will be used). In our example we shall use
**5**. We change the value in the field from 7 to 5, click the
**\[increment\] button** and then click the **\[get\] button**. As a
result, we get is the following:

![](/assets/exercises-first-steps-in-solidity-010.png)

It is again visible from the information in the gray box on the left
that the first call is to the function **increment** and the second call
is to the function **get**. The returned value is equal to 12 (the first
passed value was 7 so 7 + 5 = 12).

Congratulations! You have successfully completed this part of the
exercise.

Previous Invoker
----------------

Write a Solidity contract as described below:

-   Keep the address of its **previous invoker** in the **persistent
    storage** -\> not accessible outside the contract

    -   **getLastInvoker()** returns **(bool, address)**

    -   **true** / **false** -- if a previous invoker exists or not

    -   The **address** that has invoked the contract before you

    -   **Accessible** from outside the contract

**Add appropriate Events for the functions
(**<http://solidity.readthedocs.io/en/v0.4.21/contracts.html#events>)

Test and play around with the contract

Registry of Certificates
------------------------

Write a simple contract in Solidity that represents a registry of
certificates.

-   Each certificate has its **owner** and **content calculated as
    hash**

-   The registry holds of all valid certificate hashes stored on the
    blockchain (as string)

-   Only the owner can add certificate hashes: **add(hash)**

-   You may use this tool
    <https://emn178.github.io/online-tools/sha3_512.html> to calculate
    hashes

-   Anyone can verify Ð° certificate by its hash: **verify(hash)**

Add appropriate **events** for the functions

Test and play around with the contract

Simple Token
------------

Write a contract that represents a **simple token**

-   The **initial supply** must be set at contract's creation

    -   This amount must be allocated to the address that creates the
        contract

-   You should store the **balances** of the addresses -\> **mapping**

-   Add a functionality that allows for **transfer(to, value)** of
    tokens between the address of the contract's creator and other
    addresses

    -   The number of tokens for transfer must be **bigger than 0**

    -   Check for **overflow**

Add appropriate **events** for the functions

Test and play around with the contract

 The Diary
----------

![](/assets/exercises-first-steps-in-solidity-011.png)

Alice loves to document facts. In fact, every night before she goes to
sleep she loves to remember all the thing which has happened through the
day and to write them down in her diary.

Create a **Diary** contract in Solidity which:

-   Keep in the blockchain a string array of **facts** and the contract
    **owner**

-   Only contract owner (creator) can

<!-- -->

-   Add facts (string fact) -\> accessible outside the contract

<!-- -->

-   Only people who are approved can read the facts

<!-- -->

-   **getFact(index)** -- returns specified fact by index
    \[0...count-1\]

-   Solidity cannot return all facts at once (array of strings)

-   Approved addresses are hardcoded in the contract

<!-- -->

-   Everyone can see how many facts there are in the diary

<!-- -->

-   **count()** -- returns the count of facts -\> not change the state
    of the contract

<!-- -->

-   Nobody can delete facts or destroy the contract

Use **modifiers** where it is appropriate.

Add appropriate **events** for the functions.

Test and play around with the contract.

Planet Earth Contract
---------------------

Create contract that:

-   Declares all continents (Europe, Asia, etc..). Use the best way to
    declare them -- we know that there are fixed amount of continents
    and we know their names

-   Declares a data representing a single country (**name, continent,
    population**)

-   Keep track of **each country's capital**, so people can check
    **country's capital by simply giving a name**

-   Store **only** European countries

-   Have a function to **add** **country** (should accept **only**
    **European** **countries**). The function accepts all countrie's
    properties (**name, continent, population**)

-   Have function to add a capital to a single country (No duplicates --
    i.e. Sofia cannot be a capital of both Bulgaria and Romania)

-   Have a function that gives the capital by a given country name

-   Have a function to **remove a capital**

-   Have a function that returns the string representation of each
    continent (i.e. I receive "Asia", "Europe", etc.)

-   Have a function that returns all European countries

Students Info Tracker
---------------------

![](/assets/exercises-first-steps-in-solidity-013.png)

In the first Blockchain Secondary School every lecturer should store the
students' information. The information should be public and everyone
could see it.

-   Write a simple contract in Solidity that keeps track of students'
    names, addresses(eth), array of marks and number in class:

<!-- -->

-   Only the owner of the contract (lecturer) can create students
    profile and give marks it does not matter the class/lecture (should
    be store in appropriate data structure)

    -   Hint -\> use **struct**

    -   Students profile should be stored in an array -\>
        **Students\[\]**

-   Everyone can get the information -\> **get(index) **

Use **modifiers** where it is appropriate.

Add appropriate **events** for the functions.

Test and play around with the contract.

(Optional) Crowdsale for Lambo
------------------------------

![](/assets/exercises-first-steps-in-solidity-014.png)

Nowadays everyone makes Crowdsales which means everyone gives you money
because you just give them promises about better world. Then you just
withdraw the money and go to Bali or buy a Lambo. Let's make one! Let's
buy Lambo and go to Bali!

Write a Solidity contract that has a function through which anyone can
send it ethers:

-   Function **deposit()** should store ethers to the contract balance

    -   Hint -\> use **payable**

-   Only the owner of the contract can check the current balance of the
    contract

    -   Contract **balance** -\> **this.balance**

-   When the owner wants, he can withdraw the ethers and then kill the
    contract

    -   Hint -\> **address.transfer**(amount)

    -   Hint -\> **suicide**(owner)

Use **modifiers** where it is appropriate.

Add appropriate **events** for the functions.

Test and play around with the contract.

What to Submit?
===============

Create a **zip file** (e.g. **username-intro-solidity.zip**) holding the
**.sol** files from problems above.

Submit your zip file as **homework** at the course Web site.
